---
title: Writing is thinking
summary: Thinking is hard.
date: 2023-11-01
aliases: 
draft: true
category:
  - blog
content_type:
  - musings
tags:
  - writing
layout:
  - PostSimple
status:
  - edit
---

I have cardboard boxes and storage bins filled with all of my full journals since high school. In recent years, I now digitally take notes and journal more than ever. I document my thoughts, feelings, ideas, interests, and reflections every day. I take notes from books and podcasts, and things I want to remember. I "write" every day. I have *thousands* of notes and entries. 

But I don't consider myself a writer. 

Perhaps an obvious reason is because I have not yet publicized much of this "writing". Most of my notes are digital chicken scratch; incoherent, run-on sentences; haphazard, disorganized word vomit; incomplete ideas and unfinished lists. Publishing my "writing" in such a crude form certainly would *not* make me feel like a "writer".

So what even IS writing, then? 

It's increasingly obvious putting words onto paper (physical or digital) is not equivalent to writing. As I've pondered this question looking forward to publishing something— ANYTHING— it occurred to me that outside of school assignments, as much as I thought I loved writing, I honestly may have never actually "written" anything in my life.

I've been wanting to publish a personal blog for a looong time. I love thinking deeply about things. My mind feels like an endless faucet of ideas and connections. I have so many thoughts dancing around in my head that I want to explore more deeply and share with the world. And since "writing" is a daily practice for me, I thought surely I would already have plenty of material to easily write a coherent piece. 

So what's been the hold up? 

Well, as it turns out... <span className="bold-underline">writing is hard</span>. 

Capturing ideas in bullet points is the easy part. But attempting to write in a way that is engaging, interesting, and valuable for others; actually finding the language to convey meaning and make the reader feel what you feel; now THAT is hard. 

It almost seems as if the meaning of the idea evaporates into nothingness once there is an active attempt to convey it. 

> [!quote] When I write, I feel like an armless, legless man with a crayon in his mouth. — Kurt Vonnegat 

Ugh, same. 

Since I've taken an interest in writing more seriously, I've been inspired by many modern writers (or in many cases, entrepreneurs that also happen to write). The irony is many of them write about writing. And nearly all of them that write about writing, allude to the fact that, for them, <span className="bold-underline">writing is thinking</span>.  

> [!quote] I write in order to think. — Kevin Kelly

> [!quote] Writing is the process by which we realize we don't know what we're talking about. —  Shane Parrish

> [!quote] You’ll discover that the majority of your ideas arrive while writing—not before. You write in order to think. — Julian Shapiro

> [!quote] Writing doesn't just communicate ideas; it generates them. — Paul Graham 

I've found this to be true. 

Since I was young, writing has always been an outlet for me. And now I know why— because the process of writing is actually the process of formulating language around your thoughts and feelings, an important step in emotional processing.

Like the average person, thoughts fly around in my head all day. Sometimes I write an entire post in my head. But when it comes to actually putting pen to paper, fingers to keys, I question if those thoughts were actually even in the form of words to begin with, or if I was just interpreting them as such. The thoughts seem so far from reach as actual words with meaning.  

> [!quote] The blank page may feel intimidating; the claims may still feel mushy. - Andy Matuschak

I really believe the thoughts and feelings we have on a daily basis are not generated by us. I believe they may be entities or energies external from us, and that we actually *experience* them, rather than create them. As if our brain is an antenna; a receiver that attracts "like" thoughts and feelings all day long. 

It may seem farfetched, or like spiritual nonsense, but if you ask yourself, "What thought am I going to have next?", chances are, you're not able to answer that question. If you were coming up with the thoughts you have yourself, surely you would know which thought you would have next. 

And how often do you have an idea that spontaneously arrives out of no where at the perfect time? Do you credit yourself with the genius, or do you thank the muse? 

Since, as far as I believe, we are "experiencing" most of our thoughts unconsciously— that is, we are not conscious of them— I think that explains where writing comes in. In order to actually write, you need to be consciously present to some degree to convert the experienced thoughts into language. 

And for most of us, consciousness is not our normal operating mode. Consciousness is often experienced as a fleeting feeling of presence, before we return to the "unconscious" state of attracting more thoughts with our head antenna. 

And so, I draw the following conclusion: 

Writing is thinking. Thinking is consciousness. Consciousness is fleeting. Writing is difficult. 

Perhaps I am jaded from the world of digital marketing, but it unfortunately feels "blog" has been completely bastardized into SEO tactics, affiliate links, and AI-generated content. You won't find that here, though. You'll only find raw discipline and perseverance to push past the blocks to get words on the screen, and an ongoing struggle with confidence to hit publish. 

If you've considered, like me, exploring writing and sharing, I can validate that this is indeed supposed to be hard. 

But I think, if you have something worth saying, you'll find a way to say it. 

> [!quote] Keeping thoughts to yourself can be a disservice to the world. — Julian Shapiro
